My
first contact with Walter Monk was before, was in
1937, when
he was an undergraduate at Caltech. You got to see
him going? Sure had. He came down here in the
summertime, that summer. I think he basically
came down here because he was interested in the
girl named Shlump Sanders,
the granddaughter of Ellen Browning Scripps'
lawyer, Jacob Harper. Anyhow, he was here, and he
worked at Scripps. And we spent several days
together sitting in a rowboat about half a mile off
the end of our pier measuring currents. We had a
contraption that you could lower to the bottom.
It would sit on the bottom and measure currents
there. And we could also measure them in the water
coming up to the surface. And we did this by hand
over and over and over again for several days.
And he came back. He's been coming back ever since.
He was one of our first summer fellows at Scripps.
He turned out so successfully that they've been
running this summer fellowship program for the
last 40 years. I don't think they've ever found
anybody quite his equal. In fact, I don't know of
anybody who ever became an oceanographer that
way, besides Walter. But maybe once in 40 years is
enough.
Well, exactly how did Operation Crossroads
evolve?
The first I heard of it was when two naval captains,
I was a commander in the Bureau of Ships then,
two naval captains, one of whom was Horatio
Rivera, You may have heard of him. He was later
deputy chief of naval operations, commander of
NATO forces in southern Europe, later ambassador
to Spain.
He was a little man from Puerto Rico, about five
feet, two inches high, and one of the brightest men
I ever saw in my life.
A captain named Ashworth, Fred Ashworth, who was
an aviator, called me into their office
and asked me to help pick out a site for an atomic
bomb test, a test of atomic bombs against naval
ships.
So Mary Sears and I got together, and
they were thinking about Bikini already. in the
Marshall Islands in general,
we recommended a bikini. But they'd already been
thinking of making a test. You may not remember it
if you're too young, but in those days, there was a
great deal of question about whether, with the
existence of atomic bombs, naval ships were of any
use anymore. So the problem of just how vulnerable
ships were to them was an important subject. And
we, of course, had lots of ships. We had the
greatest Navy that the world had ever dreamed of,
let alone seen. Many more ships than we had
possibly ever used again. And so they They
appointed Admiral W.H.P. Blandy as commander of
his task force, and Deke Parson as the technical
officer in charge.
Both these officers were members of what the Navy
has called a gun club. They were ordnance
officers. Although Blandy had actually had
command Task Force
in the city. They were both service officers,
service ship officers. But I guess Parsons was
actually a specialist, but not in line of command.
He was a specialist in ordnance. He had been
involved right from the beginning at Los Alamos
and elsewhere in the development of the Manhattan
Project. And he was the bombardier on one of the two
atomic bomb drops in Japan.
And they assembled a staff, a
big staff. worked very closely with Los Alamos,
who were making the bomb. They were really
devices. One of them was a device, and the other was
an actual
weapon. And one of the things that we thought had to
be known was what would be the effect of the
explosion and the radioactivity on the atoll. So
we decided that we'd make an ecological,
essentially an ecological base study to find out
what the conditions were before they, find out as
much as we could about what was there and what
things were like before any radioactive had been
released and before there was any explosion. And
so we sent out an old ship, the Bowditch,
to do with a whole group of scientists, various
kinds of scientists, geologists, botanists,
fish people, people to study all the different
kinds of living things that were there. One of the
people was Harry Ladd from the Geological Survey.
Another was a man named Taylor from the University
of Michigan. William Randolph Taylor was a great
taxonomic botanist. Jack Marr was there for the
fishing, for the fish part of it. Quite a few fish
people. We had experimental fishermen as well as
fish taxonomists. And they spent about six months
making a profile of what Bikini Atoll would like.
And the surrounding waters where Ken Emery was
there did a lot of work on the bottom. I
guess Bill Bonarcs was there.
There were three people from Woods Hole looking at
the water and looking at the diffusion of the
water. It was a
group of people from a lot of different
institutions. One of the people was Marsden
Sargent from SREPS, who was my assistant in the
Bureau of Ships. And he was made the project
officer.
And they had this old hydrographic survey ship
that was sent out there and spent about six months
there, long in advance of the arrival of the task
force, finding out what the biology was like. Then
we had other oceanographic things that we,
responsibilities that we had were, one, to
measure the waves. That was perhaps the most
important
thing. We thought there might be some very big
waves, particularly from the underwater test.
And we also had a group of destroyers to measure the
radioactivity in the water outside the atoll to
try to follow the fallout. I'm not sure they were
destroyed. I think they were EPCER. They were
smaller than the destroyer, about six of them.
John Lyman was in charge of that part of it.
And then we had I
guess everything was really related to the waves,
one way or the other. But we did a lot of different
things. We put up photographic towers 100 feet
high. put the cameras on them, it would be started
automatically. And still cameras, essentially,
would take very good pictures of what happened,
the sequence of events. We had bottom-mounted
wave meters, which we called turtles. They were
developed by Alan Vines and his whole. Jeff Holder
had a very simple system. He put up sticks on the
beach, poles on the beach, with a series of tin cans
nailed at different heights above the beach. And
those cans that were filled with water would show
how high the wave was at that point, you see.
Another
man who was not part of our group, but who was the
same ingenious kind of a person was Bill Penney,
who later became Lord Penney, in charge of the
British atomic weapons establishment.
He had tin cans that were closed. You could measure
the blast by seeing how much these were bent or
dented, how much they were squeezed together.
Almost as ingenious as Jeff's idea of these open
tin cans that would show the wave
height. a whole ship that was devoted to these
oceanographic measurements. John Isaacs was
very much involved with the photography. Gifford
Ewing and Walter Monk were involved with the
measurements of the dispersion or diffusion of
the radioactivity inside the atoll. We had a lot of
measurements, ways of measuring radioactivity
inside the atoll. I think Ted Folsom was involved
with this, too. I'm not quite sure whether he was or
not, but I think so.
John Isaacs can tell you a lot about that. He had all
sorts of funny experiences. We were putting up
these wave measuring devices and dispersion
measuring devices. all over the atoll. It was
about 20 miles long, the lagoon, I mean, inside the
atoll. And they had a series of landing craft
to carry them around and to move from one end of the
atoll to the other. These were not LC VMs. They were
one size larger. They were essentially about 50
foot long, 60 foot long, and quite beamy, sort of
barges. And it was typical. Those were the days
when the Navy was its absolute navy. And most of the
enlisted men there were guys who had been paroled
or
sentenced to jail or the Navy's equivalent of jail
for quite a long time. But if they'd go out to
Bikini, they'd be paroled, put on probation. And
it was typical. crews of these damn landing craft
would get up to the far end of the lagoon and say,
well, we think our discharge papers have arrived.
We better go back.
And the only guys that were there with them were the
civilians, the scientists. They didn't pay any
attention to them. They had to pay very little
attention to them. They had to go back and by God,
their discharge papers had arrived. And you had to
get another crew and start all over again. We had
also quite a bit of experimental work in advance of
it, particularly the underwater test. Because
the underwater test was, there had been a theory
developed in the last part of the war, which was
given a good deal of credence by Winston
Churchill, that he thought it was true that you
could make a huge wave if you made an explosion at
the right, big enough explosion at the right depth
underwater. The theory more or less wore this out.
that this wave would travel a very long way and
would be a kind of a weapon, causing
very considerable amounts of damage at great
distances. This underwater explosion was one way
of testing this out. And in order to get some idea of
the magnitude and of the phenomenology, Mike
O'Brien, who was then dean School of Engineering
at Berkeley, College of Engineering at Berkeley,
organized a series of tests, test explosions,
which they photographed with high-speed
photography.
And
we, afterwards, we looked back on those tests and
we saw something which really occurred as a
painting. That was something called the Bay
Surge. Have you ever heard of the Bay Surge? The Bay
Surge is the most frightening thing I ever saw in my
life. First time to see it. It was what looked like a
wall of solid water, several hundred feet high,
moving very rapidly out from the point of the
explosion.
But after it got about half a mile out, it stopped.
and lifted from the surface. And then there was a
huge rain. And what it was was essentially a very
dense cloud. It was a density current. What
happened was that the underwater explosion shot a
column of water and air, a huge pillar, about half a
mile across, up into the air. And then this thing
settled down again. And it was essentially a mist
or a cloud. But it was heavier than air because
there was so much water in it. So it came down like
this and then spread out like this. Then as enough
water dropped out of the thing, it was hot.
Therefore, the air was able to lift above the
surface of the base surge after about something
like 30 seconds. just lifted off the water. It
turned out not to be a wave at all. And there were
waves in addition, and we were able to measure the
waves. The waves were like 10 feet high or 15 feet
high. This thing was, to begin with, a couple
hundred feet high. This looked terrible. It moved
very, very rapidly. It was what we call a density
curve, coming out like that. This was a very
interesting phenomenon, which we never would
have really been able understand or even to record
if it hadn't been for the
enormous amount of work that John Isaacs and other
guys did in setting up these photographic towers
and the photographic
systems. A year later, I organized something
called a re-survey of Bikini. This was after I was
in ONR. The re-survey went back there with a much
smaller task force to see what had happened, what
was it like a year later. We had a group of
biologists and radiochemists there. That was one
of the hardest jobs I ever did in my life, was
organizing the scientific part of that
re-survey. Nobody wanted to be involved.
But there were lots of radiochemists. And I
managed to get Charlie Coriel, who later became a
professor of chemistry at MIT. I somehow got, I
guess I knew him before the war. I knew him at UCLA.
And he'd been involved with the radiochemistry
business all during the war. And he managed to
recruit a group of good radiochemists to go out
there to work on this problem.
If it hadn't been for him, I would have been sunk. I
used to stay up 2 or 3 o'clock in the morning calling
people all over the country, trying to get them to
go out on this resurvey at Bikini. This was in 1947.
And it worked out very well. The most important
outcome, however, scientifically, was the
drilling that we did on Bikini Atoll. We got an oil
well drilling company contract to drill a hole in
the reef. Because the results we got in the
previous year from our seismic work indicated
that the limestone was several thousand feet
thick. The reef was several thousand feet thick.
And that maybe at a depth of a mile or more, you
finally came to basalt.
This is one of the great, at that time, one of the
great unsolved questions was, what was the origin
of coral reefs? Darwin had had the idea long ago,
150 years ago, 250 years ago now, that coral reefs
were sunken volcanoes. And then as the volcano
sank, the coral reef built up. And at first, you had
a volcano here with a fringing reef around it. As
the volcano sank, the reef moved out and became a
barrier reef. And as the volcano sank still more,
you had nothing except the reef and the lagoon in
the middle. And there
were other people who said this was just nonsense.
The reefs were formed during the Pleistocene. And
so it was very important. very important, thought
to be a very important thing to do to find out just
what they were like. And it turns out, it turns out
that they were at least Bikini, and later
Eniwetok, and
other ones that have been studied since, that
they're all flat-topped seamounts where the The
mountain was planed off at sea level with a pile of
volcanic ash, in other words, lava, cut off by
waves at sea level. And the coral grew around the
edges of these things. And then they sank. And as
they sank, the coral, if they sank slowly enough,
the coral could keep up and eventually ended up
with an atoll. The lagoon in an atoll, however it is
a Pleistocene phenomenon, when the sea level was
about 200 feet lower than it is now, these things
were all planed off. And so the islands around the
edges of the atoll, I mean the atoll itself, the
islands around the lagoon, are all not more than a
million years old, formed during the Pleistocene
on a platform planed off during the Pleistocene,
which is the bottom of the lagoon, the deepest part
of the lagoon. But underneath that, there's a bone
pile 6,000 feet thick, or 4,000 to 6,000 feet
thick, of the remains of coral and coralline
algae, which grew on a submerged volcanic
platform. And you find lots of things called geos,
or flat top seamounts, which sank too fast and
which have a little bit of coral on them. but not
very much. And they're covered mostly with
manganese, crusts of manganese, with occasional
shallow water fossils, enough so you can tell
their age and that they were in shallow water when
they were planed off. And that was one of the
discoveries we made during our mid-Pacific
expedition. These sea mounts, far from being a
billion or two billion years old, were about 100
million years old. of Cretaceous age. And we found
that by finding fossils that were shallow water
fossils, now at depths of 6,000 feet, which were
Cretaceous fossils. But the first
part of this study was the seismic work during
Operation Crossroads. But in the follow-up? In
the follow-up, in the bikini resurvey. Should we
have another Bikini test, by the way, now that the
bombs are more powerful? Well, we have had a whole
series of the hydrogen bomb tests on Bikini and on
the Weetalk. They tested all the big
thermonuclear weapons
there. But you're thinking about a test against
ships? Yes. Well, that's very hard to do.
We did have a test of an underwater atomic weapon
down here off Mexico. We lowered the weapon to
about 3,000 feet and exploded it.
But nobody's ever, as far as I know, nobody's ever
exploded a thermonuclear device underwater.
I may be wrong about that. In any case, they're so
big that if you explode one lagoon like Bikini
Lagoon. You'd blow the water out
of the lagoon. I only have one other question about
this part of your career I want to ask you. Why not a
career in the Navy? Did you ever consider a career
in the Navy? Yes, I did.
But
after World War II, not before World War II.
But I
really wanted to go back to Scripps. The only
reason for considering a career in the Navy was
that
they didn't really want me back at Scripps very
much. And a lot
of guys
didn't. fairly complex story, but Carl Eckhardt
and Harold Sverdrup were just bound and
determined that I could be Sverdrup's successor
as director of
the Scripps Institution.
And there were a lot of, there were several other
people on the faculty who didn't think this was a
good idea at all, including Fran Shepherd and Carl
Hubbs of Fisheries. They had different reasons.
My analysis would be that Hubbs thought we ought to
have a biologist. Not a military man, not a naval
man. All things not a naval
man. Shepard's opposition was basically because
we hadn't gotten along very well when he had this
project, GSA project. He's
really not very bright.
If Lyman Spitzer has an IQ 40 points higher than
mine, my IQ is considerably higher than Francis
Shepherd's.
Shepherd's got other qualities, including
indefatigable curiosity and enormous energy.
But how'd it all be smart? And that's kind of hard to
work with a much younger man who's a lot smarter
than you are. You don't have a generous spirit.
So in any case, They were opposed to my being
director. And finally a compromise was hit on that
was that Carl Eckhart should become director. So
he was director for two years. Was that? 48 to 50. 48
to 50. OK, that makes sense. And he asked me to come
back as an associate director, which I did. And I
was promoted to the professorship at the same
time. I'm the only guy who ever went from being an
instructor to being a professor without any
intermediate steps. I was an instructor when I
went into the Navy and came back here as a
professor.
And as associate director. My impression is you
were carried on the faculty listing of Scripps
Institution the whole time you were the Navy.
That's right. Sure. They may have even promoted me
in absentia. I'm not quite sure about that.